okay so so you got turned
onto philosophical and Theological ideas
I I took an intro to philosophy course
and we read the Republic and I met
Socrates Aha and what did that do well
see the thing about my upbringing is it
had left a taste in my mouth for the
Transcendence uh you know
uh a missing a sage if I can put it that
way and then I met this figure of
Socrates who uh
made the logos come alive and gave me a
new way of understanding rationality and
made me a way of understanding
spirituality and
Transcendence um in a way that was
consonant with my burgeoning interest in
science and reason and that right so
that that was a defragmentation process
profound profound that's why um I will
not
follow I will not follow any religion
any any pseudo religious ideology any
political Vision that says You must
abandon your loyalty to Socrates that's
not going to happen for me that's not
going to happen for me and okay and so
what was it specifically about Socrates
that attracted you do you think well
there was a lot originally I thought but
but that's but see Socrates talked about
that himself he talked about how he
seduced people into philosophy right
because at first it was oh look he wins
all the arguments yeah right and you
when you're first year student and
you're coming out of high school in the
meeting crisis
right that that's very appealing cuz
then you can you know it's but then you
realize the people he's defeating are
the sopus are the people who are after
the the phon Nika not philosophia and
then you realize that he criticizes him
himself as much as he CR and you get
drawn into this and you get caught up in
this process of self-correcting and self
transcending and doing it with other
people dialogically getting caught up in
like you know Jesus talk so that that's
is there is there is there something
about the essence of higher order
meaning that is uh either analogous to
or identical with
self-correction I think uh well I think
that's the axio revolution the axio
revolution right when PE people like
sidart or people like Socrates is the
recognition that our meaning making
Machinery is actually also
simultaneously the source of a lot of
our suffering uh and and that and that
simultaneously empowers us and but
challenged is us because it I mean I
mean you think about the damop you know
the mind is the beginning of everything
and if you don't if you don't if like
your best the greatest Ally you can have
is your is your mind but the greatest
enemy you can have is your mind right
and that and so you get this tremendous
yeah because questioning improves but it
also destroys right exactly and so you
need a figure that is like Socrates you
know he's open to following the logos
wisdom begins in Wonder but there's
tremendous courage he demonstrates it to
death he demonstrates it unto death this
is tremendously encouraging for that was
tremendously encouraging for me and so I
got caught up in this and then I wanted
to follow this except academic
philosophy at the time after first year
stops talking about wisdom and the love
of wisdom and you get into all of these
arguments about meta ethics and meta you
know epistemology and those are useful
tools you I I they're useful for Science
and so I kept going on for that reason
but this hung
was not being satisfied so literally
down the street for me there was a TA
chin Meditation Center so I went there
because I decided to give Eastern
philosophy because I've been reading
some Herman Hessa a chance and I started
doing practicing Tai chichan and
practicing the pastan meta I was
introduced to l i was introduced to
sidarta and so these things opened me up
and around that time I was started to
read Pier Hado and how our ancient
philosophy the stoics and the and the
epicurian and the neoplatonist and the
Skeptics they also practice philosophy
as a way of life and then I started to
realize how much this overlapped with
early Christianity and some forms of
existing Christianity it started to help
me a Repro to Christianity and to
religion because I became very I became
very well you've always you've always
struck me at your core as a as a
religious
thinker I mean that's part grappling
with deep ideas and and that's the same
thing but you're you're right and and um
it's one of the things that
distinguished you from say the other
professors that while they were at the
University of Toronto but the
professorate in general and I also think
it accounts to some degree for your
impact on students I I think that's true
my
uh around this when I when I the episode
I did for awakening to the meeting
crisis on Agape I had Christians
Christian ministers like Paul clay said
that was one of the best presentations
of
agape and and and then yeah Define that
for
everyone
so other than sort of desire there's
three kinds of Love AOS is the love that
is accomplished by consummation so in
and I don't mean this in some creepy
Fran sense but I can have Aeros for a
cookie because I become one with the
Cookie by eating it and we consummate a
marriage right and you consummate a
relationship in you know in sexual
intercourse and then there's FIA and
this is the love that is born out of
reciprocity this is friendship love this
is the love that emerges and affords
dialogos that's why it's FIA Sophia it's
the dialogical love of wisdom together
and then there is the love that a parent
has for a child you don't love a child
because you want to be one with the
child that's exactly the wrong project
you're trying to make the project
autonomous from you and of course your
child isn't your friend when you bring
the child home from the hospital they
can't do anything they're not even a
cognitive agent they're a moral person
but they're not a cognitive agent you
love a child it's like this Magic by you
love them because by loving them you
turn them into a fullblown cognitive
agent it's like if I could stare at a
sofa and turn it into a Ferrari it's
that kind and and and and in that sense
it is the most fundamentally profound
creative engage and we and we're cre
like we're we're not just creating
meaning we're creating the beings that
participate in meaning that as you
indicated earlier could disclose some of
the most fun because they're at the Apex
of emergence right that they can
disclose some of the most fundamental
aspects of reality so Agape is the Deep
recognition of that in that sort of
voluntary necessity and being compelled
to draw into it and Jesus Is Right Jesus
you know the Epistle of John God is a
God Jesus is the the the the sage of
that think about what Agape means Jesus
comes and he the the agapic way the most
excellent way as Paul says Agape says I
to the Roman people in the Roman Empire
we can take all the non-persons of the
Roman Empire all the women all the
children all the widows all the slaves
all the impoverished all the non-romans
and we can make them into persons
because we live the most excellent way
of agape and Agape is is the god power
that turns non-persons into persons and
that conquers the Roman Empire and
that's why and the whole ancient world
and that's why it conquers the Roman
Empire right and and and precisely and
and so and and my my partner Sara who's
not a Christian right and and I don't
profess to be one but she she she took
me aside at one point and she
said and I want this understood that I'm
saying this at an arms length okay and
you're a good friend so you'll I'll
Trust you for that but she said you're
actually the only real Christian I've
ever met
mm what did she mean by that well I of
course I asked her yeah right and she
said because you you know she she said I
get it you don't identify with a set of
doctrines but you you try to live agap
agape and you try to follow ody embody
and you try to follow the logos and you
and you've structured your whole whole
life and the cultivation of your
character around that and you well
that's what belief that's that's believe
to give your heart to that's what
definitely to stake your life on it
that's that's why I have a certain
amount of problem with the propositional
the reduction of belief to the
proposition propositional tyranny that's
that's what it is well it's also you
know it's propositional tyranny but it's
also substitute it's a substitution it's
like well now I've got the propositions
down you know and I talked to some
evangelists in in Washington I know some
some very very wise evangelicals in
Washington um they do remarkable work
they're involved in the prayer breakfast
there and and have been for decades
really committed people and we were
having a very serious conversation one
day about the erors let's say of the
Evangelical movement one of them being
the substitution of the propositional
for the existential and then the
counting of souls you know the number of
people who accept the propositional
Creed which isn't nothing you
it's necessary but it's not sufficent
it's also it's also maybe one way that
the propositional can echo down through
the emotions and the motivations and
become something embodied but that's a
there's a large Journey from the purely
propositional let's say the APO APO the
Apostles Creed to actually embodying
there are so many we we mentioned this
earlier this is p this is Socrates this
is Plato through and through there are
truths that are only disclosed to you
after you go through fundamental
transformation
and that is different from assenting to
a proposition because you have been
convinced of its truth that a very
different see this is the cartisan
problem the cartisian project is here's
a universal method that does not require
you to undergo existential
transformation you just apply the
universal method it will give you access
to all the universal propositional
truths and that's all we need and that
is a big mistake this is why I practice
a form of cognitive science that
emphasizes that I have a new paper out I
think I sh shared it with you why
relevance realization is not
computational because ultimately you
can't capture all of that relevance
realization all that binding all that
transformation all that meaning making
in a formal set of propositions it's
just not going to it's not going to do
it for you right right right right so
yeah yeah well that's an extension of
the argument that the propositional
isn't sufficient yes
[Music]